[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Israel's Negev Desert, just
35 miles South of Jerusalem.
In the 1960s, researchers
make an astonishing discovery
while excavating an
archaeological site
called Tel Arad.
A shrine dating back
to at least 715 BCE.
Inside, they collected
charred remains
of an unidentified
plant material.
According to a new report
released in June of 2020,
it was unidentifiable until
advancements in chemical
analysis made a breakthrough.
The charred material
was cannabis.
It is the oldest discovery of
cannabis in the ancient Near
East, confirming the substance
played an important role
in the spiritual lives of
people in the kingdom of Judah.
>> My understanding is that
cannabis has been used widely
in many cultures, everything
from the Vedic traditions,
to Buddhism, to Mbwiti, and
many of the South American
traditions.
>> Ancient India, Asia, Persia,
and Africa all are now known
to have some ancient ceremonial
connections between cannabis
and their religion.
>> I don't believe there's
another plant that served
humans more than cannabis,
not only to deal with pain
management, but to
create soap, clothing,
and you name it from hemp.
The cannabis plant is one
of the most important ones,
and it's been used for thousands
and thousands of years.
>> Cannabis is one of the
oldest-cultivated crops
in the world and is emerging as
a modern-day wonder of commerce
and industry.
As new genetic variations,
medicines, and industrial uses
are developed, some
fear the cannabis plant
will be changed forever.
For some, this is
part of a movement
to live more
harmoniously with nature.
As we uncover new archaeological
cannabis and hemp discoveries,
we can construct a more complete
understanding of this plant's
role in human history.
Could cannabis, with its
many gifts for mankind,
be the true tree of life?
As a sacrament,
cannabis was carried
throughout the Old World
trade routes and can likely
be traced back to ancient
Egypt, ancient Greece,
as well as the early days
of Christianity, Buddhism,
Hinduism, Islam, and as the Tel
Arad discovery proved, Judaism.
It's important to note the
difference between the two
primary subspecies of the plant.
Cannabis sativa, with
higher amounts of THC,
possesses psychoactive
properties.
Cannabis sativa L,
or hemp, does not,
and has primarily been
cultivated for manufacturing
textiles, oil, and food.
The earliest written
evidence of using the plant
dates back to 2737 BCE when
descriptions of hemp oils
and teas were recorded in
Chinese emperor, Shen Nung's
Pen Tsao Ching.
But use most likely
dates back even further.
>> There are archaeological
sites in China.
It appears that cannabis
came out of China
and that some of these sites
are at least 10,000 years old.
It's clear from
the plant materials
that were recovered
that these were
resinous forms of cannabis.
They weren't hemp.
There were actually medicine.
>> Cannabis is the oldest
cultivated plant in human
history.
Some say it is actually
the tree of life,
or an analogy of
because it has so many
uses, hundreds of uses.
>> The concept of a sacred
plant or a tree is found in many
ancient religions.
For some it's called
the tree of life--
a symbol of love, fertility,
wisdom, and immortality.
The tree of life
may also commemorate
our symbiotic
relationship with nature.
Some faiths see it as a
provider of healing nectar
or a gateway to enlightenment.
Sumerian translator and
Gnostic scholar Anton Parks
suggests that the tree of life
is significant in human history
and mythology.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The story of the tree of life
can be found in many cultures.
The Gnostic texts
mention it a lot.
It relates to ways for people
to achieve transcendence.
We can see it in representations
and through the very specific
use shamans make of plants.
I think that you can find this
story or possible story mixed
up in many cultures--
the idea that you can enter
in direct communication
with the divine through plants.
>> I believe that the
tree of life is cannabis.
When I look at what plant would
be more useful to humanity,
and rather than thinking
that the tree of life
had anything to do with
the fall of humanity,
I think keeping this
plant away from the people
has had a lot more to do
with the fall of humanity.
>> I feel that cannabis
was one of the main plants
in the Garden of Eden.
And I feel that the reason
that cannabis has come back
in such a big way
in our society is
because we've gotten so out
of balance with the masculine,
with this force in the
world of doing and taking
and conquering.
>> I think any powerful symbol
like the tree of life is meant
to mirror life in
many different ways.
So it can look like
an actual tree.
It can be our own
neural networks.
It can be what's going
on beneath the soil.
To me it's the idea of as
above, so below; as within,
so without.
>> "The Urantia" book says that
there was an actual tree that
grows throughout the
universe, and that a group
of extraterrestrials brought a
tree here about half a million
years ago that would help them
to be immortal and also help
them to civilize humanity.
>> Is it possible that
this sacred plant may have
originated from elsewhere
in the universe?
There's a tribe in Africa
called the Dogon People,
and they knew about Sirius
B before we discovered it
with our telescopes.
And one of the interesting
things about this culture,
one of the many
interesting things,
is they use cannabis for
many things in their tribe
and in their livelihood for
we don't even know how long.
They don't have a
written history.
But they say that cannabis
was given to them by the star
people from Sirius.
>> The Dogon people called
Sirius the Two Dog star,
and today we call these two
stars Sirius A and Sirius B.
Curiously, in Latin this
constellation's name suggests
something more profound.
>> The word cannabis can be
broken down into-- the word
canine is for dogs
and Bi means two.
So cannabis, actually, we can
define as meaning Two Dog star.
>> If cannabis means
the Two Dog star,
what might be the significance
of this beloved animal
for the Dogon?
Psychiatrist
Stanislav Grof posits
that celestial archetypes
often act as spiritual guides
during altered states
of consciousness.
>> If psychiatry goes in the
right direction, in my opinion,
it would be working with these
sacred medicines and using
archetypal astrology as a guide.
Archetypal astrology is amazing.
It's amazing for
people in these states
to have some kind of guidance.
What is happening to them
to understand that it's not
completely erratic?
>> Modern agricultural practices
have all but depleted the soil.
Deforestation,
pollution, and pesticides
are doing long-term damage
to the soil, mycelium, water,
and the air we breathe.
>> In modern agriculture, we
have very little to no respect
for what lives within the soil.
Tilling destroys these
very complex communities
and networks of
organisms, root systems,
and mycelium that are part of
the intelligence of the soil.
>> I think when plants
are grown inorganically,
they're grown onto lots,
they're grown with chemicals,
and they're grown with the
motivation of growing them
for profit.
I think this destroys
the spirit of the plant.
You need diversity in
all systems of life,
and you need diversity in
the cannabis realm as well.
>> I think the most fundamental
thing that we could do
to change the way we grow food
or medicine is being in a state
of relationship, to come
in a place of offering.
In a more traditional
model of agriculture,
which is being more and more
integrated into smaller-scale
settings, it's
all about how well
you take care of the soil, what
you give back to the soil that
allows you to have
the kind of outcomes
that you want in
terms of a harvest.
>> Despite all of the advances
in technology and agriculture,
hunger and starvation
continue to plague the world.
Hemp cannabis may
offer solutions.
It's a medicine and an
industrial material,
but can it also be
a source of food?
>> It's a plant that can provide
fuel, medicine, fabric, paper,
oil for cooking, and cannabis
is one of the most nutritious
plants on the face of the earth.
The seeds alone-- excellent
profile of Omega 3
to Omega 6 fatty acids, which
are so important for our brain
health.
We also know that cannabis
seeds are high in protein and B
vitamins and vitamin E, and
it's a very versatile seed.
>> As a possible food source,
hemp consumes only one-third
of the water of corn, a crop
that is also heavily reliant
on various pesticides.
Hemp is not.
It also has potential
as fabric and paper.
>> Now, another environmental
problem is paper,
and paper used to
be made from hemp,
and it doesn't yellow the
way paper from trees does.
>> Paper mills contribute to
a major source of chemical
pollution in waterways.
>> Trees have a
substance called lignin,
and lignin requires a lot
of chemicals to separate
the lignins from the trees,
whereas cannabis has a lot less
lignin and it can give its
paper-making properties off
with about one-seventh
the amount of chemicals.
>> It can even help
wean us of fossil fuels.
Hemp-derived biodiesel produces
very low sulfur dioxide
and it doesn't deplete the soil.
>> I see great possibilities
ahead for use of this plant
that grows so easily.
It can grow as tall as
a tree in three months
and put down a root system
that nourishes the earth,
and the root decomposes.
There's really nothing like it.
>> Here's an ideal stand.
The right height to
be harvested easily,
thick enough to grow
slender stocks that
are easy to cut and process.
>> One of the oldest
cultivated crops in the world,
cannabis just might be able
to help the earth evolve
into a cleaner and more
sustainable economy.
But humans face increasing
rates of disease.
How bright is the future
if those issues are not
addressed as well?
>> Be careful how you use it.
For to grow hemp
legally, you must
have a federal
registration and tax stamp.
>> In recent years, the legal
prohibition dam in the United
States has burst.
With state after state
decriminalizing cannabis.
The fastest growing commercial
product from this plant
is its medicine.
Breakthroughs in
research are documenting
cannabis' therapeutic abilities
with anxiety, pain management,
and with the side effects
from chemotherapy.
This has led the way in changing
the public's perception.
>> We're realizing the
tremendous amount of benefits.
It's almost good for
everything-- fibromyalgia,
lupus, and immune system
disorders, and pain management
as well, and giving it to cancer
patients to increase appetite.
>> You know, I think the most
amazing emerging evidence
regarding medical marijuana
is its effects against cancer.
There were studies
in the '70s, as early
as the '70s, that
indicated that cannabis
stopped the growth
of tumors, and even
reversed it by stopping the
blood flow into the tumor.
>> I believe there are
435 different chemicals
in the chemical plant.
It's a matter of understanding
what kind of resonance
there needs to be between all
of these chemicals, to what
level of degrees of
strength and weakness
they need to exist
for us to treat
this specific ailment,
this specific disease,
and this is the engineering
that needs to happen.
>> To meet the demand
for psychotropic effects,
today's commercial cannabis is
most often bred to have higher
levels of THC.
Humans have selected
certain strains
for certain characteristics
not unlike what we
do with animals, for example.
We get certain breeds that
have certain characteristics
by selecting and breeding
those, and so this happens
in the plant world as well.
>> You can modify cannabis
through conventional methods
like selective breeding or
even genetic engineering.
You can create all sorts of
tailored strains of cannabis.
But if you look at it in terms
of this human-plant symbiosis
relationship, it doesn't seem to
mind that we can manipulate it
in all kinds of ways.
The therapeutic effects
seem to be related
to ratios between THC and CBD.
They're really two
different critters.
They have different effects.
And so biotechnology
opens up the possibility
that you can develop these
designer strains of cannabis.
If you want to breed
for psychoactivity,
you can have higher THC levels.
If you want to breed for some of
the benefits that the CBD has,
you could have high-CBD
strains of cannabis.
CBD is technically
a not psychoactive,
but it does have analgesic
effects, so muscle relaxant
effects and this sort of thing.
>> But can this practice lower
the ratio of other potentially
beneficial cannabinoids?
>> For a lot of the
history of cannabis,
people have focused
on the effects of THC,
which is one of the
eight major cannabinoids.
And THC has many
medicinal properties,
but it also, when
burned or carbonized,
it has a kind of high effect.
And so some people are
attracted to the use
of these high-THC strains
for that high effect.
But what happens is the
other cannabinoids exist
in a certain ratio, and if you
have more of one cannabinoid,
you have less of the other ones.
So we have recently found
that CBD and CBN are
two of the other
cannabinoids that
have all of the medicinal
properties of THC plus some,
but they don't have
the high effect,
and these can be
consumed as an edible.
So this is good news for people
who don't want to get high,
but want to have all of
the medicinal properties
that this amazing plant offers.
>> A debate remains over whether
or not THC checks all the boxes
as a psychedelic.
>> Technically, cannabis
is not a psychedelic from
a neuroscience standpoint,
and even really from
an experiential standpoint,
but cannabis is most certainly
a teacher plant and certainly
could be put in the category
of these very profound
master plants.
I would not say cannabis
is a psychedelic.
>> THC that nature
provides up to 3%-4%,
and now with the engineering
and the cultivar and hydroponics
can go up to 28%-29%,
that's psychedelic.
So cannabis can get psychedelic.
>> What plant medicine
traditions use cannabis
as an accessory to aid
the healing potency
of the ceremonial
psychedelic, and why?
>> There is, I think, some
branch of the Santo Daime that
it smokes marijuana in their
ayahuasca ceremony and around
their ayahuasca ceremonies, and
they use it that way and work
with it that way.
For us, the Shipibo,
at least my experience,
is that it can interfere with
our way of approaching things.
And so it can interfere
with our experience
with ayahuasca, not in every
case, but in many cases.
>> Cannabis is a really
interesting energy because she
kind of has a little bit
of a trickster energy.
In the Mbwiti
tradition, many times,
because it's a stimulant,
it can be very activating,
cannabis can be used
to calm and to ground.
But one thing about
cannabis is it can also
reactivate other medicines.
For instance, if
you smoke cannabis
after taking
5-MeO-DMT, you can go
right back into
a full experience
without taking the 5-MeO.
So I think that you have to
be careful with cannabis,
but it is traditionally
part of the medicine
bag of most medicine teachers
in the indigenous traditions.
>> So cannabis is a
powerful plant medicine,
highly regarded as a
master plant as well,
even in the Amazon.
And so I do see it as
a spiritual teacher
for many people.
For the Shipibos, the
people that I work with,
they just comment that
marijuana, like many plants,
has its dark side.
It has its light side,
its medicine side,
and it has its dark side.
The dark side of marijuana is
a tendency towards anxiety,
tendency towards paranoia.
They call it like a
sticky energy, holding on.
You don't progress
emotionally, like delaying
emotional maturation,
staying into some kind
of adolescent attitudes
about certain things.
So they would warn
that that's also there.
So we need to be aware
of that and still find
ways to use it medicinally.
>> Is it possible that these
imbalances can be harmful
and that the prohibition
of cannabis was justified?
>> The THC mostly affects
the way your brain works.
It interferes with
your short-term memory,
your concentration, even with
how well you learn things.
Like tobacco, inhaling
marijuana smoke
is dangerous to
your lungs and can
be harmful to your heart,
your reproductive system,
and your immune system.
And the chemicals in pot
can stay in your body
up to 30 days, long
after the high wears off.
>> Most experts agree it's
not something that can kill
an individual by overdosing.
>> There's usually a mechanism.
For example, opiates--
people die from overdose
because it suppresses
respiration,
but cannabis just does not
affect those core brain stem
functions that
maintain breathing
and all the other
things that are
keeping us going in the
autonomic nervous system.
So it's just a matter of they
just don't have those effects.
>> For decades, cannabis was
demonized and criminalized
despite its relative safety,
especially when compared
to other substances.
So now can this plant
finally bring even
the most nature-blind
consumers back to their senses?
Early civilizations owe a
debt of gratitude to hemp.
Simple yet strong
hemp ropes enabled
us to conquer the oceans
with our sailing vessels
and helped us to domesticate
livestock and horses,
allowing us to migrate
vast distances.
While cannabis' spiritual
potential is well-established,
hemp has important
practical applications
in the physical world.
Astonishingly, our
ancestors seemed
to have an understanding
of this as well.
It wasn't just
consumed or smoked.
Hemp was literally one of the
building blocks of civilization
around the world.
>> Cannabis is such
a versatile plant,
and we're still discovering
its myriad of benefits.
But in the ancient
world, it's possible
that cannabis was used as food,
that it was used as medicine,
that it was used
as a fiber plant,
for animal bedding--
the leaves can be fodder for
animals, for horses and goats
and so forth--
that it was used as
building material, roofing.
>> In the sixth century, the
Merovingian Dynasty built many
bridges throughout the south
of France made of stone
and a hemp-based concrete.
These structures have
stood the test of time.
This durable substance wasn't
relegated to southern France.
Nearly 5,000 miles away
near Maharashtra, India,
a similar mixture
of hemp and clay
was found plastered on the
walls of the alora caves.
Over time, hemp
fell out of favor,
hastened by the
prohibition of the plant.
But now, coinciding with
the acceptance of cannabis,
hemp's versatility as a
textile and building material
is being rediscovered
in some surprising ways.
Builders have
updated the concrete
from Merovingian
times, and many believe
this is not only superior
to traditional concrete,
but more sustainable.
Innovative products
derived from hemp
can also replace less
sustainable materials
for cars, homes, planes,
shipping materials, paper
goods, packaging, and clothing.
So much of what we
currently use, like plastic,
is destructive to the
environment or simply
unsustainable.
Could the reemergence
of hemp be one more way
to help us live more
harmoniously with nature?
Cannabis is often consumed
in a communal setting,
helping individuals connect
on a spiritual level.
But what if it can
make connections
on a technological
level by meeting
our need for inexpensive
supercapacitors and energy
systems?
Lithium batteries are
used in just about all
of our cutting-edge
technologies--
smartphones, computers,
and even electric cars.
While their ability to recharge
cuts back on some waste,
we pay a heavy price
for their production,
environmentally
and economically.
The extraction of
lithium and graphene
as well as the toxic
chemicals needed
to process them are polluting
our soil, air, and water.
Researchers are unlocking
the capabilities
of hemp-derived graphene,
opening the possibility
of creating batteries that
are just as powerful, more
sustainable, and cost a small
fraction of today's leading
tech.
>> Cannabis has the potential
to bring a more cost-effective
and eco-friendly solution
to our technological future.
Could its mind-bending
effects also
hold the key to our
spiritual future,
bringing human beings back
to the ecology of Gaia?
>> I have great hopes for
this plant, cannabis sativa.
With so many problems
on our planet,
even though there's
so many plants,
this is one plant that
could heal so many
of the environmental travesties
that we have going on.
The world needs hemp.
I know if I were
going to another world
and could bring
one plant with me,
it would be cannabis because
there is nothing like that
can do so many things.
>> In the next episode,
explore the feminine revival
of the guardians of plant
spirits and their hidden
potential to bring
humans closer to nature.